Course Discussions
Course discussions will be organized via Slack. Please use this link to join Slack discussions: https://join.slack.com/t/cmpsc473sp26/shared_invite/zt-3opzi71f5-AQElLNn3DqYsXF577jr7kwLinks to an external site.

Do not post or ask for any personal, confidential, or identifying information on Slack. This is only intended for course-related questions. Also do not post any code or any solution unless you are specifically instructed to do so by the instructor.

 

Learning Agreement
We are a Community of Learners (You, our Teaching/Learning Assistants and I), and for the educational process to be most effective for all of us, together, it is essential for each member of this community to understand our specific roles and expectations for success. Please take a moment to read the following commitments that all of us should be prepared to honor during our time together in this course. 

 

What you can expect from the instructor:
1. When contacted, I will try to respond to all of your inquires in a timely manner. Due to a high volume of requests, it is typically recommended to attend office hours (with TAs or the instructor) or post corresponding questions in the course discussion page. However, please do not hesitate to follow up with the instructor when the matter is urgent and requires a faster response.
2. I want you to learn and succeed so do not be afraid to ask for clarification if you have questions about your assignments, grades, and any related feedback. 
3. Your opinions, thoughts and words matter to me and will make a difference in this class. It is my job as your instructor to ensure that you feel safe and supported as you stretch your mind around new concepts in a new learning environment.
4. Your success is important to me. I understand that there are many challenges for students in today's world and we will be here to support you when questions arise and you need guidance. Please do not hesitate to contact the instructor when you have a concern and want assistance in this course. 
Links to an external site.
What I will expect from you:
1. A desire to learn and a commitment to obtain skills that you can use in other courses as well as out in the real world.
2. Be respectful. Technology affects so much in our daily modern life and so it's important that everyone feels secure and comfortable to explore it, talk about it, and ask questions whenever we are learning something new in the class.
3. Complete all coursework (projects, homeworks, exams, etc.) to the best of your ability and please communicate whenever you have a concern that might prevent you from meeting a particular learning objective or due date.
4. Computer Science is both fun and creative, yet also analytical and scientific at the very same time. Be ready to
embrace new concepts and recognize that mistakes are a vital part of the learning process, so it is crucial to
allocate enough time to cover the course material.
 

Why Operating Systems
Operating systems is a critical piece of the computer systems software. Decade-long experience with teaching computer systems [see the CSAPP textbook below] has shown the importance of discussing the stuff under the hood. Thus, we need to know operating systems to become better programmers and design fast, secure, and reliable software.

 

Past and Upcoming Lectures

Date	Topic	Reading material
01/13	Introduction. C language (recap)	
01/15	C language (recap).	
01/20	CPU Virtualization.	OS3: Chapter 13.3
01/22	CPU Virtualization.	OS3: Chapter 6
01/27	Dynamic Memory Allocation.	CSAPP: Chapter 9.9
01/29	VM setup walk-through (by a TA).	 
02/03	Dynamic Memory Allocation.	CSAPP: Chapter 9.9
02/05	Dynamic Memory Allocation. (Offline recording.)	CSAPP: Chapter 9.9
02/10	Project 1 info. Virtual memory: DRAM as a cache, address translation: MMU, paging and page table.	CSAPP: Chapter 9.1-9.6, 9.8
02/12	Virtual memory: continuation.	CSAPP: Chapter 9.1-9.6, 9.8
02/17	Virtual memory: continuation. Project 1 Hint: Footer Optimization.	CSAPP: Chapter 9.1-9.6, 9.8
02/19	Virtual memory: continuation.	CSAPP: Chapter 9.1-9.6, 9.8
02/24	x86-64 Page Tables. Project 2.	 
02/26	Page Replacement.	 
 

Short Description: Design and implementation of computer operating systems; management of various system resources: processes, memory, processors, files, input/output devices.

 

Prerequisites: CMPSC 311, CMPEN 331

 

Lectures: Tue Thu, 1:35PM-2:50PM, ECoRE Bldg 028 (Section 1)

                 Tue Thu, 1:35PM-2:50PM, ZOOM (Section 2): use the Zoom link

 

Requirements: C programming, Linux, GDB debugger


Midterm exam:

March 4, 2026 6:15PM - 7:30PM (The location(s) will be posted later)

Note: SDR students who are given extended exam time will start at 6:15PM but will get their extension after 7:30PM and should plan to stay longer accordingly


 

Final exam:

To be announced (after being scheduled by the registrar)

 

Instructor
Ruslan Nikolaev (rnikola@psu.edu)

 

Teaching Assistants
Wanhang Lu (wvl5336@psu.edu)
Vishwas Vasudeva Kakrannaya (vvv5127@psu.edu)
Xi Wang (xkw5215@psu.edu)
Woohyeon Baek (woohyeon.baek@psu.edu)
Raj Pandey (rzp5412@psu.edu)
Yujin Huang (YujinHuang@psu.edu)
 

Instructor Office Hours (tentative)
Thursday 3:00-4:00PM (Westgate Building W331)

 

TA Office Hours (held in 300 Building)
Note: you can visit any TA irrespective of your recitation assignment.

Mon 11:00AM - 2:00PM (Raj Pandey)

Mon 2:00 PM - 3:30PM (Xi Wang)

Tue 11:30AM - 1:00PM (Xi Wang)

Tue 3:30PM - 6:30PM (Woohyeon Baek)

Wed 2:00PM - 5:00PM (Yujin Huang)

Wed 5:00PM - 6:30PM (Vishwas Vasudeva Kakrannaya)

Thu 9:30AM - 12:30PM (Wanhang Lu)

Thu 5:00PM - 6:30PM (Vishwas Vasudeva Kakrannaya)

 

Recitations
Friday every week, except holidays & breaks. (Please see your registration for time and location.)

 

Required Supplies
A laptop/phone for taking (potential) quizzes, see Grading below for more details

(Alert the instructor if you are unable to meet this requirement)

 

Required Textbook
- “Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces” by Remzi Arpaci-Dusseau and Andrea Arpaci-Dusseau (OSTEP)

(A free online version: https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/Links to an external site.)

 

Recommended Textbooks
- “The Little Book of Semaphores” by Allen B. Downey

(A free online version: http://greenteapress.com/semaphores/LittleBookOfSemaphores.pdfLinks to an external site.)

- “Computer Systems: A Programmer's Perspective” by Bryant and O'Hollaran (CSAPP)

 

Learning Objectives
By the end of the course, students will be able to

develop complex system-level code to manage memory, compute, and storage

write and debug concurrent code and utilize debugging tools such as gdb

explain the design and implementation decisions for virtual memory, paging, caching, threading, synchronization, and filesystems

 

Summary (subject to change)
Introduction, C programming

GDB, GIT, Linux basics, Makefiles (recap/tutorials)

CPU scheduling, threads, and processes

CPU modes, interrupts, traps, context switches

Kernel threads, user threads

Virtual memory, paging, page tables, TLB, page replacement algorithms

Dynamic memory allocation

Concurrency, mutual exclusion, locks (Peterson’s and Bakery algorithms)

Race conditions, deadlocks

Semaphores, condition variables

I/O devices, DMA

Storage, HDD, RAID

Filesystems, file descriptors, i-nodes, free space management

 

Grading
50%: Projects

10%: Homeworks

15%: Midterm (in-person, location and date TBD)

25%: Comprehensive final (in-person, location and date TBD)

 

Grading Scale (subject to change)
A: 94%+, A-: 90%+, B+: 87%+, B: 84%+, B-: 80%+, C+: 77%+, C: 70%+, D: 60%+, F: everything else

 

We may also add in-class quizzes (in which case up to around 5% from the above items will be reallocated towards quizzes), though no final decision regarding this has been made yet.

 

Copyright Statement
All course materials students receive or to which students have online access are protected by copyright laws. Students may use course materials and make copies for their own use as needed, but unauthorized distribution and/or uploading of materials without the instructor’s express permission is strictly prohibited. University Policy AD 40, the University Policy Recording of Classroom Activities and Note Taking Services addresses this issue. Students who engage in the unauthorized distribution of copyrighted materials may be held in violation of the University’s Code of Conduct, and/or liable under Federal and State laws. 

 

Project Submissions

Programming assignments will be due at their announced due dates. The actual submissions must be pushed to your course Github repository, and you also must submit a corresponding SHA of your final Github commit as part of your Canvas submission. Emailed submissions will not be accepted. Be sure to submit complete assignments that build and run. This is your responsibility. Attempts to trick the system by modifying timestamps and/or misrepresenting the actual submission time anyhow will be considered academic integrity violations.

 

Points may be deducted for reasons such as missing features, compiler warnings, crashes, improper use of tools (source control), improper submission.

 

Late Policy

Each assignment can be submitted at most 1 day late with a 15% penalty. 1 day refers to 11:59PM the day after the assignment is due, which may be more than 24 hours. All times in the course are in local time (Eastern Time). Requests for make-up exams will not be entertained. The only exceptions are medical/family emergencies or conflicts due to other university events (Senate Policies 44-25Links to an external site. and 44-35Links to an external site.).

 

Course Management

We use Canvas as our course management system. All materials including reading assignments, project assignments, homeworks, and other information will be posted there. We also will use Slack for all course communication. Please do not use email. Grades will be posted on Canvas.

 

Academic Integrity

Academic integrity is the pursuit of scholarly activity in an open, honest, and responsible manner. Academic integrity is a basic guiding principle for all academic activity at The Pennsylvania State University, and all members of the University community are expected to act in accordance with this principle. Consistent with this expectation, the University’s Code of Conduct states that all students should act with personal integrity, respect other students’ dignity, rights, and property, and help create and maintain an environment in which all can succeed through the fruits of their efforts.

Academic integrity includes a commitment by all members of the University community not to engage in or tolerate acts of falsification, misrepresentation, or deception. Such acts of dishonesty violate the fundamental ethical principles of the University community and compromise the worth of work completed by others. 

Students facing allegations of academic misconduct may not drop/withdraw from the affected course unless they are cleared of wrongdoing (see G-9: Academic IntegrityLinks to an external site.). Attempted drops will be prevented or reversed, and students will be expected to complete course work and meet course deadlines. Students who are found responsible for academic integrity violations face academic outcomes, which can be severe, and put themselves at jeopardy for other outcomes which may include ineligibility for Dean’s List, pass/fail elections, and grade forgiveness. Students may also face consequences from their home/major program and/or The Schreyer Honors College.

The CSE Department’s has its own statement on Academic IntegrityLinks to an external site., which we will follow in this course. We may use tools to identify similarities with submitted code and other code from online sources and any submission, prior or present.

In this course, all work (e.g., programming assignments, quizzes, exams, etc.) is to be done individually and independently. For certain assignments, groups of two people will be allowed but the work has to be split equally and done independently. No outside help of any form, including generative technology, such as ChatGPT, is permitted. You are also responsible for securing your work so that you do not intentionally or unintentionally assist any other student in violating the academic integrity policy. For example, the following are strictly forbidden:

Looking at another student's code (except the other partner in your group, note that the work still has to be split equally)

Debugging another student's code (except the other partner in your group when is justified and requires two members for debugging, note that the work still has to be split equally)

Looking online (including but not limited to websites, repositories, forums, social media platforms, generative technology such as ChatGPT) for hints on how to solve an assignment

Getting hints from another student on how to solve an assignment

Providing hints to another student on how to solve an assignment

Using any code from any online source

Posting any course-related code to any online public location (e.g., public github repository, online forums, etc.)

Assisting anyone in violating any academic integrity policy either intentionally or unintentionally from not securing your work

Getting any help from any source other than a course staff member

The above list is non-exhaustive, and it is your responsibility to ensure that you A) complete all the coursework individually and independently without any outside help of any form, and B) secure your work so that you do not intentionally or unintentionally assist any other student in violating the academic integrity policy.

 

Accommodations for Students with Disabilities 
Penn State welcomes students with disabilities into the University’s educational programs. Every Penn State campus has an office for students with disabilities. Student Disability Resources (SDR) website provides contact information for every Penn State campusLinks to an external site.. For further information, please visit the Student Disability Resources websiteLinks to an external site.. 

In order to receive consideration for reasonable accommodations, you must contact the appropriate disability services office at the campus where you are officially enrolled, participate in an intake interview, and provide documentation: See documentation guidelinesLinks to an external site.. If the documentation supports your request for reasonable accommodations, your campus disability services office will provide you with an accommodation letter. Please share this letter with your instructors and discuss the accommodations request with them as early as possible. You must follow this process for every semester that you request accommodations. 

Students with disabilities participating in internship, practicum, student teaching, or other experiential learning opportunities as part of their degree requirements may also be eligible for reasonable accommodations to ensure equal access and opportunity. These accommodations are determined through an interactive process involving the student, their University supervisor, and the site supervisor. Student Disability Resources can assist students with identifying potential barriers, facilitating accommodation requests, and coordinating with University supervisors to promote inclusive learning experiences. 

Counseling and Psychological Services 
Many students at Penn State face personal challenges or have psychological needs that may interfere with their academic progress, social development, or emotional wellbeing. The university offers a variety of confidential services to help you through difficult times, including individual and group counseling, crisis intervention, consultations, online chats, and mental health screenings. These services are provided by staff who welcome all students and embrace a philosophy respectful of clients’ cultural and religious backgrounds, and sensitive to differences in race, ability, gender identity and sexual orientation.    
Counseling and Psychological Services at University Park  (CAPS)Links to an external site.  
(http://studentaffairs.psu.edu/counseling/): 814-863-0395  

Counseling and Psychological Services at Commonwealth CampusesLinks to an external site.  
(https://studentaffairs.psu.edu/about/audience/cwc-students)  

Penn State Crisis Line (24 hours/7 days/week): 877-229-6400  
Crisis Text Line (24 hours/7 days/week): Text LIONS to 741741

Educational Equity and Reporting Bias  
Penn State takes great pride to foster a diverse and inclusive environment for students, faculty, and staff. Acts of intolerance, discrimination, or harassment due to age, ancestry, color, disability, gender, gender identity, national origin, race, religious belief, sexual orientation, or veteran status are not tolerated and can be reported through Educational Equity via the Report Bias webpageLinks to an external site. (http://equity.psu.edu/reportbias/)   

 

Reporting Sexual Misconduct 
Sexual misconduct is never tolerated at Penn State. Prohibited conduct includes sexual and gender-based harassment, stalking, sexual assault, and dating violence. These behaviors are not allowed in the classroom, the campus community, labs, or anywhere students, staff, and faculty are located. Prohibited behaviors can include degrading comments such as belittling female-identified students, LGBTQ+ individuals, and gender-diverse students. It can also include harassment, touching someone without their consent, following someone without consent, repeated calls or messaging, physical acts of violence, and more. In other words, professional and appropriate behavior is always expected, and inappropriate or unprofessional behavior is never tolerated. For more information, please refer to the Student Code of Conduct and Penn State Policies AD85 and AD91. (Title IX Sexual Harassment | Penn State Policies (psu.edu)Links to an external site. and Discrimination and Harassment and Related Inappropriate Conduct | Penn State Policies (psu.edu)Links to an external site.) 

  

If you or anyone you know has experienced or is concerned about inappropriate or unprofessional behavior, you can talk with College, or School leadership, your instructor, academic advisor, or another trusted faculty/staff member, report to police or the Office of Sexual Misconduct Reporting & Response (titleix.psu.eduLinks to an external site.), or you can seek confidential support and assistance from the Gender Equity Center. The Gender Equity Center supports any student who has had negative relationship experiences including those impacted by sexual violence, relationship violence, stalking, harassment, and other campus climate issues. Services include one on one crisis intervention/support, advocacy, exploring options, accommodations, safety planning, and referrals. They also promote awareness, build support for survivors, and conduct educational programs and events. All services are free and confidential. Gender Equity Center | Penn State Student Affairs (psu.edu)Links to an external site. 